
=head1 NAME

lard.conf - lard configuration file

=head1 SYNOPSIS

This configuration file is read by lard(8) on startup.

The configuration file consists of B<keyword> - B<value> pairs describing
logfiles and options.

=head2 Global options

Global options describe parameters that only make sens in a global context,
like B<listen> and B<socket>. All other options are default parameters
for the logging rules.

The global section is defined as everything up to the first B<rule>. A
rule starts with one of the following keywords: B<file>, B<pipe>,
B<command> or B<host>. Once any of these keywords is encountered,
all keywords are assiciated with this rule-starting keyword, until
a new rule-starting keyword is encountered.

=over 4

=item B<listen> {IP address|IP addres:port}

Define the IP address and optionally the UDP port where the daemon
will listen on in remote reception mode (B<-r>).

=item B<socket> {filename}

Define an alternative UNIX socket to look for incoming local syslog
messages instead of '/dev/log'/

=item B<mark> {seconds}

Change the default number of seconds that the logging daemon will
log a heartbeat timestamp using '-- MARK --'. The default is 20
minutes. Setting this to '0' disabled logging of these marks.

=back

=head2 Rules

A (new) rule starts with a rule-starting keyword as described above.
This rule inherits default values for globally defined parameters such
as B<keep>, B<rotate>, and B<compress>. Locally defined options
override any globally defined ones. Some of these parameters
have system defaults.

=over 4

=item B<file> {filename}

Define a new rule that will append messages into a logfile.

=item B<pipe> {pipename}

Define a new rule that will keep a pipe open and write messages
into it.

=item B<command> {command}

Define a new rule that will spawn a command for every message
that matches the logging criteria. The message is passed as
commandline parameter to the command. This may be unsafe!

=item B<host> {hostname}

Define a new rule that sends matching messages to a remote
logging host.

=back

The options below (with the exception of B<log> and B<match>) can be
specified both globally and in rules:

=over 4

=item B<domain> {domainname}

Strip (if applicable) the domainname from the hostname.


=item B<rotate> {"hourly"|"daily"|"weekly"|"monthly"|[size]}

This option describes when a logfile needs to be rotated and only
applies to the B<file> rule.

=item B<keep> {number}

Define the number of old logfiles to keep before deleting the oldest
one during rotation.

=item B<compress> {"gzip"|"bzip2"|"none"}

Define the type of compression used to compress logfiles when
they are rotated. "none" means no compression.

=item B<log> {facility.priority}

Define which facility and priority must be matched on this rule.
A '*' for the priority or facility means "all", such that:

    *.*

would match all incoming messages of all facilities and priorities.

A facility may be a comma-separated list of multiple facilities:

    local0,local1,local3.*

And even so for the priority:

    *.debug,info

A facility or priority may even be negated with a '!' character,
which results in the rule NOT matching that priority/facility:

    *.!debug

For a list of facilites and priorities, see syslog(8).

=item B<match> {expression}

On top of the priority and facility, a message must also match
this regular expression. The expression can include perl-like
regular expression directly. The following example would match
all messages that appear to be coming from the ssh daemon:

    match " sshd\[\d+\]: "

=item B<format> {format-string}

The format string allows you to specify an alternative message
layout. The layout is a string with keywords that will be
substituted for every message:

    format "%{TIMESTAMP} %{HOSTNAME} %{MSG}\n"

The %{keyword} words have specific meaning of course.

    %{TIMESTAMP} - the time the message was sent
    %{HOSTNAME} - the originating hostname of a message
    %{MSG} - the message data
    %{facility} - the message facility printed out
    %{priority} - the message priority printed out

The following fields are also available but should be used with
caution:

    %{facility_code} - the facility code (binary)
    %{priority_code} - the priority code (binary)
    %{raw} - the full raw message
    %{time_recv} - the time received
    %{length} - length of the raw message
    %{HEADER} - the full original header
    %{peerhost} - the sending hostname
    %{peerport} - port that the sending host used
    %{PRI} - encoded priority/facility data
    %{TIME} - time received in UNIX time

=item B<timeformat> {timeformat}

Define a format to use to print the time in a message. This follows
the syntax that date(1) also uses. Example:

    # stock syslogd uses:
    timeformat "%b %e %H:%M:%S"

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

lard(8), lard.conf(5), [RFC 3164]

=head1 AUTHOR

lard was written by Auke Kok, http://lard.foo-projects.org/

=head1 COPYRIGHT

The author disclaims all copyrights and releases this document into the
public domain.

=cut
